Salinet features: Kya hai jo ise alag banata hai baaki constituions se?
These are not basic features.

SALIENT FEATURES:
1) Longest known constitution: v detailed, lengthiest in the world.
original has 8 schedules and 395 articles
current has 448 articles in 25 parts and 12 schedules.

2.MIXTURE OF FEDERALISM AND UNITARIANISM: quasi-ferderal structure
division of powers is vertical b/w centre and the states which results in duality of govt.

3. PREAMBLE TO THE CONSTITUTION: declares india to be a sovereign, socialist, secular, democratic, republic and a welfare state committed to secure justice, liberty and 
equality for the people and for promoting fraternity, dignity of the individual and unity and
integrity of the nation.

4.SINGLE CITIZENSHIP: same right of a person wherever he resides.

5. ADULT SUFFRAGE: right to vote to 18+ (article 326), irrespectibe of caste, class, bg etc.

6.Recast by Amendments: has been recast by amendments like 7th, 42nd, 44th ,
73rd, 74th , 104th
there are 104 amendments that have been made in indian constitution.

7.FEDERAL CONSTITUTION WITH MINIMUM RIGIDITY: certain provisions can be amended by ordinary legilation of parliament passed by a simple majority
but, other provisions can only be amended by following special procedure i.e passes in lok sabha and rajya sabha

8.FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS: articles 12-35 grants and guarantees fundamental rights to its citizens.

9.DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES OF THE STATE POLICY: The DPSPs are certain values and ideals to be the basis of
policy-making. They provide a framework for the government to follow while formulating policies and laws

10.FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES OF THE CITIZENS: part iv a (article 51a)
originally there were 10 fundamental duties, they were increased to
11 by 86th amendment in 2002. they are not enforceable by the
courts

11.BICAMERAL LEGISLATURE: A bicameral legislature is a type of legislative body that is divided into two separate chambers or houses. In a 
bicameral system, the legislature is composed of two distinct parts, each with its own set of responsibilities and functions. 
Lok Sabha (House of the People, the lower house) and the Rajya Sabha (Council of States, the upper house).

12.Parliamentary form of government: british model pe based
president elsect hota hai by the people but it still does not rule the nation.
he is the head of the state while pm is the head of nation.

13.INDEPENDENT JUDICIARY: everyone is equal before the law. judiciary is expected to provide justice to all sections of the society.
given adequate powers
supreme court acts as guardian of the constitution

14.JUDICIAL REVIEW: Judicial review is concomitant to guaranteed fundamental rights and
is essential for protecting them

15.JUDICIAL ACTIVISM: through public interest litigation system (pil),as well as, through a
more active exercise of powers, the Indian judiciary has been now
very actively trying to secure all public demands and needs due to
them under the laws and policies of the state.

EMERGENCY PROVISIONS
-circumstances when govt has to take immediate action in response to sudden situations.
-Part XVIII of the Constitution of India between Articles 352 and 360
deal with emergency.
-enable the union government to centralize the powers to it and the system becomes completely unitary in nature

3 TYPES:
-NATIONAL (ARTICLE 352): from war and external aggression.
president can make proclamation only on the advice of council of ministers.

-CONSTITUTIONAL (STATE)(ARTICLE 356): state is not being run in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution,i.e failure of constitutional machinery.
state govt is dismissed and centre has all powers.
no impact on distributio of resources b/w centere and state.

-FINANCIAL(ARTICLE 360): resulting from threat to financial stability in India




